 Situation
The information available for the July 30–31 meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained strong and that real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a moderate rate in the second quarter. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), was below 2 percent in June. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed.

Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a solid rate, on average, in recent months, supported by a brisk gain in June. The unemployment rate edged up to 3.7 percent in June but was still at a historically low level. The labor force participation rate also moved up somewhat but was close to its average over the previous few years, and the employment-to-population ratio stayed flat. The unemployment rates for African Americans and Asians declined in June, the rate for whites was unchanged, and the rate for Hispanics edged up; the unemployment rate for each group was below its level at the end of the previous economic expansion, though persistent differentials between these rates remained. The share of workers employed part time for economic reasons in June continued to be below the lows reached in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings held steady in May, while the rate of quits edged down but was still at a high level; the four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits through mid-July was near historically low levels. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in June, somewhat faster than a year earlier. The employment cost index for private-sector workers increased 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in June, the same as a year earlier. (Data on compensation per hour that reflected the recent annual update of the national income and product accounts by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) were not available at the time of the meeting.)

Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in June. This increase was slower than a year earlier, as core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) moved down to 1.6 percent, consumer food price inflation remained below core inflation, and consumer energy prices declined. The average monthly change in the core PCE price index during the second quarter was faster than in the first quarter, suggesting that some of the soft inflation readings early in the year were transitory. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas remained at or near 2 percent in recent months. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in June, while core CPI inflation was 2.1 percent. Recent survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. The preliminary July reading from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers moved back up after dipping in June but was still at a relatively low level; the measures from the Desk's Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants were little changed.

Real consumer expenditures rose briskly in the second quarter after a sluggish gain in the first quarter, supported in part by a robust pace of light motor vehicle sales in May and June. However, real PCE rose more slowly in June than in the first five months of the year, suggesting some deceleration in consumer spending going into the third quarter. Key factors that influence consumer spending—including a low unemployment rate, further gains in real disposable income, and elevated measures of households' net worth—were supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. In addition, the preliminary July reading on the Michigan survey measure of consumer sentiment remained at an upbeat level.

Real residential investment declined again in the second quarter. Al­though starts of new single-family homes rose in June, the average in the second quarter was lower than in the first quarter; starts of multifamily units fell back in June but rose for the second quarter as a whole. Building permit issuance for new single-family homes—which tends to be a good indicator of the underlying trend in construction of such homes—was at roughly the same level in June as its first-quarter average. On net in May and June, sales of new homes declined, while sales of existing homes rose.

Real nonresidential private fixed investment edged down in the second quarter, as a decline in expenditures on nonresidential structures more than offset an increase in expenditures for business equipment and intellectual property. Forward-looking indicators of fixed investment were mixed. Orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased in June, and some measures of business sentiment improved. However, analysts' expectations of firms' longer-term profit growth remained soft, trade policy concerns appeared to be weighing on investment, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to decrease in recent weeks.

Industrial production (IP) was unchanged in June, as a decrease in the output of utilities offset increases in the output of manufacturers and mines. For the second quarter as a whole, both total IP and manufacturing output declined, while mining output rose notably, supported by a strong gain in crude oil extraction. Automakers' assembly schedules suggested that production of light motor vehicles would move up somewhat in the third quarter. However, new orders indexes from national and regional manufacturing surveys pointed toward continued softness in manufacturing production in coming months.

Total real government purchases rose solidly in the second quarter. Federal defense spending increased, and nondefense purchases returned to more typical levels after the partial federal government shutdown in the first quarter. Real purchases by state and local governments rose moderately, boosted by a strong gain in spending on structures and an increase in the payrolls of those governments.

The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in May relative to April, as imports increased more than exports. In June, preliminary data indicated declining nominal goods exports and imports. Within exports, declines were particularly notable for exports of consumer goods and capital goods, the latter of which had already been depressed by the suspension of Boeing 737 MAX exports. All told, the BEA estimates that net exports, after adding moderately to first-quarter GDP growth, subtracted a similar amount from GDP growth in the second quarter on declining exports and flat imports.

Incoming data suggested that growth in the foreign economies remained subdued in the second quarter. In several key advanced foreign economies, including the euro area, recent indicators pointed to slowing economic growth amid continued weakness in manufacturing and persistent policy-related uncertainty. Similarly, in China, real GDP growth slowed notably in the second quarter after a first-quarter jump. In contrast, growth in Canada and, to a lesser extent, Latin America appeared to pick up from a weak first-quarter pace. Foreign inflation remained muted but rose a bit from lows earlier in the year, largely reflecting higher energy prices.

Staff Review of the Financial Situation 
Over the intermeeting period, financial market developments reflected noticeable shifts in expectations for monetary policy in response to Federal Reserve communications, economic data releases, and trade policy developments. Federal Reserve communications were generally regarded as more accommodative than had been anticipated, exerting downward pressure on measures of the expected path for the federal funds rate. However, some better-than-expected economic data releases and a slight improvement in the outlook regarding trade partially offset these declines. Yields on nominal Treasury securities were little changed on net. Equity prices increased, corporate bond spreads narrowed, and inflation compensation rose modestly. Financing conditions for businesses and households were little changed over the intermeeting period and remained generally supportive of spending.

Measures of expectations for near-term domestic monetary policy exhibited notable shifts and reversals over the intermeeting period and ended the period little changed, on net, with market participants still attaching high odds to a 25 basis point reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate at the July FOMC meeting. Consistent with significant variation in near-term expectations for monetary policy, market-based indicators of interest rate uncertainty for shorter maturities over the near term remained somewhat elevated. Over the intermeeting period, market-based expectations for the federal funds rate for the end of this year and beyond moved down slightly on net. A straight read of OIS (overnight index swap) forward rates implied that the federal funds rate would decline about 60 basis points in 2019 and about 35 basis points in 2020.

The nominal U.S. Treasury yield curve was little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period. Both the near-term forward spread and the spread between 10‑year and 3-month Treasury yields are still in the bottom decile of their respective distributions since 1971. On net, in the weeks following the June FOMC meeting, 5‑year and 5-to-10-year inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) moved up modestly. More-accommodative-than-expected Federal Reserve communications, stronger-than-expected inflation data releases, and rising oil prices—amid increased geopolitical tensions with Iran—contributed to the upward pressure on inflation compensation.

Broad stock price indexes increased, on net, over the intermeeting period, with notable increases following the June FOMC communications, the Chair's July Monetary Policy Report testimony, and announcements regarding trade negotiations following the G-20 meeting. Additionally, there was a slight positive reaction to news of an agreement on the federal budget and debt limit. Equity price increases were broad based across major sectors, with technology, financial, and communication services firms outperforming broad indexes. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—decreased slightly, on net, and corporate credit spreads narrowed.

Conditions in domestic short-term funding markets remained fairly stable. Overnight interest rates in both unsecured and secured markets were somewhat elevated over the period. In particular, repo rates were elevated on and after the June quarter-end, with the SOFR (Secured Overnight Financing Rate) averaging 8 basis points above the IOER rate over the intermeeting period. However, the EFFR remained well within the target range, averaging 5 basis points above the IOER rate. Rates on commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit declined somewhat.

Accommodative central bank communications, both in the United States and abroad, and some easing of trade tensions generally supported foreign risky assets over the intermeeting period. Global equity indexes increased modestly, while emerging market sovereign spreads narrowed. On balance, the broad dollar index ended the period modestly lower. Notably, the British pound depreciated significantly against the U.S. dollar, reportedly as developments led investors to raise the probability they attached to a no-deal Brexit.

Most sovereign long-term bond yields edged lower, on net, reflecting firming expectations for further policy accommodation amid growing concerns about the global economic outlook. Italian yields declined notably, in part as the government passed some fiscal consolidation measures. The European Central Bank left its policy rate unchanged at its July meeting but signaled possible rate cuts at coming meetings and said it will explore options for additional asset purchases. Several emerging market central banks, including South Korea, Turkey, and Indonesia, lowered policy rates over the period.

Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses remained accommodative. Gross issuance of corporate bonds remained robust in June, followed by a typical seasonal decline in July. Issuance of institutional leveraged loans increased notably in May but in June, it returned to the more moderate pace observed earlier this year. Respondents to the July 2019 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) reported that, on net, banks continued to ease standards and terms on commercial and industrial loans to large and middle-market firms in the second quarter, with many citing aggressive competition as the reason for doing so. Gross equity issuance has been strong in recent months. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations continued to show signs of stabilization in June following some deterioration earlier in the year. Credit conditions for both small businesses and municipalities remained accommodative on balance.

In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions remained generally accommodative despite a modest deceleration in bank loan growth. Banks in the July SLOOS reported that standards were about unchanged, on net, in the second quarter for most CRE loan categories. Agency and non-agency commercial MBS issuance was strong in the second quarter, as yield spreads ticked down.

Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative over the intermeeting period. Mortgage rates were little changed since the June FOMC meeting but remained about 1 percentage point below their late-2018 level. These conditions have supported a modest increase in home-purchase origination volume in recent months. Refinance originations have risen as well but remain near historical lows.

In consumer credit markets, financing conditions were little changed in recent months and remained generally supportive of consumer spending. Growth in consumer credit in April and May was up a bit from earlier in the year due to a pickup in credit card balances. Banks in the July SLOOS continued to report tightened standards for credit cards over the second quarter.

The staff provided an update on its assessments of potential risks to financial stability. On balance, the staff continued to view vulnerabilities as moderate. The staff judged asset valuation pressures to be notable in a number of markets, supported in part by the low level of Treasury yields. In assessing vulnerabilities stemming from leverage in the household and business sectors, the staff noted that business leverage was high while household leverage was moderate. The staff viewed the buildup in nonfinancial business-sector debt as a factor that could amplify adverse shocks to the business sector and the economy more generally. Within business debt, the staff also reported that in the leveraged loan market, the share of new loans to risky borrowers was at a record high, and credit extended by private equity firms had continued to grow. At the same time, financial institutions were viewed as resilient, as the risks associated with financial leverage and funding risk were still viewed as low despite some signs of rising leverage and continued inflows into run-prone funds. Separately, the staff noted that market liquidity was, overall, in good shape, al­though sudden price drops had become more frequent in some markets.

Staff Economic Outlook
The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the July FOMC meeting was revised up somewhat in the near term, as an upward revision to households' real disposable income in the first half of the year led to a slightly higher second-half forecast for consumer spending. Even so, real GDP growth was still forecast to rise more slowly in the second half of the year than in the first half, primarily reflecting continued soft business investment and a slower increase in government spending. The projection for real GDP growth over the medium term was a little stronger, supported by the effects of a higher projected path for equity prices and a lower trajectory for interest rates. Real GDP was forecast to expand at a rate a little above the staff's estimate of potential output growth in 2019 and 2020 and then slow to a pace slightly below potential output growth in 2021. The unemployment rate was projected to be roughly flat through 2021 and to remain below the staff's estimate of its longer-run natural rate. With labor market conditions judged to be tight, the staff continued to assume that projected employment gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual downward pressure on the unemployment rate and in larger-than-usual upward pressure on the labor force participation rate.

The staff's forecast of total PCE price inflation this year was revised up a touch, reflecting a slightly higher projected path for consumer energy prices, while the forecast for core PCE price inflation was unrevised at a level below 2 percent. Both total and core inflation were projected to move up slightly next year, as the low readings early this year were expected to be transitory, but nevertheless to continue to run below 2 percent.

The staff continued to view the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years. Moreover, the staff still judged that the risks to the forecast for real GDP growth were tilted to the downside, with a corresponding skew to the upside for the unemployment rate. Important factors in that assessment were that international trade tensions and foreign economic developments seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant negative effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed. In addition, softness in business investment and manufacturing so far this year was seen as pointing to the possibility of a more substantial slowing in economic growth than the staff projected. With the risks to the forecast for economic activity tilted to the downside, the risks to the inflation projection were also viewed as having a downward skew.

Participants' Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook
Participants agreed that the labor market had remained strong over the intermeeting period and that economic activity had risen at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Al­though growth of household spending had picked up from earlier in the year, growth of business fixed investment had been soft. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed.

Participants continued to view a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes. This outlook was predicated on financial conditions that were more accommodative than earlier this year. More accommodative financial conditions, in turn, partly reflected market reaction to the downward adjustment through the course of the year in the Committee's assessment of the appropriate path for the target range of the federal funds rate in light of weak global economic growth, trade policy uncertainty, and muted inflation pressures.

Participants generally noted that incoming data over the intermeeting period had been largely positive and that the economy had been resilient in the face of ongoing global developments. The economy continued to expand at a moderate pace, and participants generally expected GDP growth to slow a bit to around its estimated potential rate in the second half of the year. However, participants also observed that global economic growth had been disappointing, especially in China and the euro area, and that trade policy uncertainty, al­though waning some over the intermeeting period, remained elevated and looked likely to persist. Furthermore, inflation pressures continued to be muted, notwithstanding the firming in the overall and core PCE price indexes in the three months ending in June relative to earlier in the year.

In their discussion of the business sector, participants generally saw uncertainty surrounding trade policy and concerns about global growth as continuing to weigh on business confidence and firms' capital expenditure plans. Participants generally judged that the risks associated with trade uncertainty would remain a persistent headwind for the outlook, with a number of participants reporting that their business contacts were making decisions based on their view that uncertainties around trade were not likely to dissipate anytime soon. Some participants observed that trade uncertainties had receded somewhat, especially with the easing of trade tensions with Mexico and China. Several participants noted that, over the intermeeting period, business sentiment seemed to improve a bit and commented that the data for new capital goods orders had improved. Some participants expressed the view that the effects of trade uncertainty had so far been modest and referenced reports from business contacts in their Districts that investment plans were continuing, though with a more cautious posture.

Participants also discussed developments across the manufacturing, agriculture, and energy sectors of the U.S. economy. Manufacturing production had declined so far this year, dragged down in part by weak real exports, the ongoing global slowdown, and trade uncertainties. Several participants noted ongoing challenges in the agricultural sector, including those associated with increased trade uncertainty, weak export demand, and the effects of wet weather and severe flooding. A couple of participants commented on the decline in energy prices since last fall and the associated reduction in economic activity in the energy sector.

Participants commented on the robust pace of consumer spending. Noting the important role that household spending was currently playing in supporting the expansion, participants judged that household spending would likely continue to be supported by strong labor market conditions, rising incomes, and upbeat consumer sentiment. A few participants noted that the continued softness in residential investment was a concern, and that the expected boost to housing activity from the decline in mortgage rates since last fall had not yet materialized. In contrast, a couple of participants reported that some recent indicators of housing activity in their Districts had been somewhat more positive of late.

In their discussion of the labor market, participants judged that conditions remained strong, with the unemployment rate near historical lows and continued solid job gains, on average, in recent months. Job gains in June were stronger than expected, following a weak reading in May. Looking ahead, participants expected the labor market to remain strong, with the pace of job gains slower than last year but above what is estimated to be necessary to hold labor utilization steady. Reports from business contacts pointed to continued strong labor demand, with many firms reporting difficulty finding workers to meet current demand. Several participants reported seeing notable wage pressures for lower-wage workers. However, participants viewed overall wage growth as broadly consistent with the modest average rates of labor productivity growth in recent years and, consequently, as not exerting much upward pressure on inflation. Several participants remarked that there seemed to be little sign of overheating in labor markets, citing the combination of muted inflation pressures and moderate wage growth.

Regarding inflation developments, some participants stressed that, even with the firming of readings for consumer prices in recent months, both overall and core PCE price inflation rates continued to run below the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective; the latest reading on the 12-month change in the core PCE price index was 1.6 percent. Furthermore, continued weakness in global economic growth and ongoing trade tensions had the potential to slow U.S. economic activity and thus further delay a sustained return of inflation to the 2 percent objective. Many other participants, however, saw the recent inflation data as consistent with the view that the lower readings earlier this year were largely transitory, and noted that the trimmed mean measure of PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was running around 2 percent. A few participants noted differences in the behavior of measures of cyclical and acyclical components of inflation. By some estimates, the cyclical component of inflation continued to firm; the acyclical component, which appeared to be influenced by sectoral and technological changes, was largely responsible for the low level of inflation and not likely to respond much to monetary policy actions.

In their discussion of the outlook for inflation, participants generally anticipated that with appropriate policy, inflation would move up to the Committee's 2 percent objective over the medium term. However, market-based measures of inflation compensation and some survey measures of consumers' inflation expectations remained low, al­though they had moved up some of late. A few participants remarked that inflation expectations appeared to be reasonably well anchored at levels consistent with the Committee's 2 percent inflation objective. However, some participants stressed that the prolonged shortfall in inflation from the long-run goal could cause inflation expectations to drift down—a development that might make it more difficult to achieve the Committee's mandated goals on a sustained basis, especially in the current environment of global disinflationary pressures. A couple of participants observed that, al­though some indicators of longer-term inflation expectations, like TIPS-based inflation compensation and the Michigan survey measure, had not changed substantially this year, on net, they were notably lower than their levels several years ago.

Participants generally judged that downside risks to the outlook for economic activity had diminished somewhat since their June meeting. The strong June employment report suggested that the weak May payroll figures were not a precursor to a more material slowdown in job growth. The agreement between the United States and China to resume negotiations appeared to ease trade tensions somewhat. In addition, many participants noted that the recent agreement on the federal debt ceiling and budget appropriations substantially reduced near-term fiscal policy uncertainty. Moreover, the possibility of favorable outcomes of trade negotiations could be a factor that would provide a boost to economic activity in the future. Still, important downside risks persisted. In particular, participants were mindful that trade tensions were far from settled and that trade uncertainties could intensify again. Continued weakness in global economic growth remained a significant downside risk, and some participants noted that the likelihood of a no-deal Brexit had increased.

In their discussion of financial market developments, participants observed that financial conditions remained supportive of economic growth, with borrowing rates low and stock prices near all-time highs. Participants observed that current financial conditions appeared to be premised importantly on expectations that the Federal Reserve would ease policy to help offset the drag on economic growth stemming from the weaker global outlook and uncertainties associated with international trade as well as to provide some insurance to address various downside risks. Participants also discussed the decline in yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities in recent months. A few participants expressed the concern that the inversion of the Treasury yield curve, as evidenced by the 10-year yield falling below the 3-month yield, had persisted for about two months, which could indicate that market participants anticipated weaker economic conditions in the future and that the Federal Reserve would soon need to lower the federal funds rate substantially in response. The longer-horizon real forward rate implied by TIPS had also declined, suggesting that the longer-run normal level of the real federal funds rate implicit in market prices was lower.

Among those participants who commented on financial stability, most highlighted recent credit market developments, the elevated valuations in some asset markets, and the high level of nonfinancial corporate indebtedness. Several participants noted that high levels of corporate debt and leveraged lending posed some risks to the outlook. A few participants discussed the fast growth of private credit markets—a sector not subject to the same degree of regulatory scrutiny and requirements that applies in the banking sector—and commented that it was important to monitor this market. Several participants observed that valuations in equity and corporate bond markets were near all-time highs and that CRE valuations were also elevated. A couple of participants noted that the low level of Treasury yields—a factor seen as supporting asset prices across a range of markets—was a potential source of risk if yields moved sharply higher. However, these participants judged that in the near term, such risks were small in light of the monetary policy outlooks in the United States and abroad and generally subdued inflation. A few participants expressed the concern that capital ratios at the largest banks had continued to fall at a time when they should ideally be rising and that capital ratios were expected to decline further. Another view was that financial stability risks at present are moderate and that the largest banks would continue to maintain very substantial capital cushions in light of a range of regulatory requirements, including rigorous stress tests.

In their discussion of monetary policy decisions at this meeting, those participants who favored a reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate pointed to three broad categories of reasons for supporting that action.

A couple of participants indicated that they would have preferred a 50 basis point cut in the federal funds rate at this meeting rather than a 25 basis point reduction. They favored a stronger action to better address the stubbornly low inflation rates of the past several years, recognizing that the apparent low sensitivity of inflation to levels of resource utilization meant that a notably stronger real economy might be required to speed the return of inflation to the Committee's inflation objective.

Several participants favored maintaining the same target range at this meeting, judging that the real economy continued to be in a good place, bolstered by confident consumers, a strong job market, and a low rate of unemployment. These participants acknowledged that there were lingering risks and uncertainties about the global economy in general, and about international trade in particular, but they viewed those risks as having diminished over the intermeeting period. In addition, they viewed the news on inflation over the intermeeting period as consistent with their forecasts that inflation would move up to the Committee's 2 percent objective at an acceptable pace without an adjustment in policy at this meeting. Finally, a few participants expressed concerns that further monetary accommodation presented a risk to financial stability in certain sectors of the economy or that a reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting could be misinterpreted as a negative signal about the state of the economy.

Participants also discussed the timing of ending the reduction in the Committee's aggregate securities holdings in the SOMA. Ending the reduction of securities holdings in August had the advantage of avoiding the appearance of inconsistency in continuing to allow the balance sheet to run off while simultaneously lowering the target range for the federal funds rate. But ending balance sheet reduction earlier than under its previous plan posed some risk of fostering the erroneous impression that the Committee viewed the balance sheet as an active tool of policy. Because the proposed change would end the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings only two months earlier than previously indicated, policymakers concluded that there were only small differences between the two options in their implications for the balance sheet and thus also in their economic effects.

In their discussion of the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, participants generally favored an approach in which policy would be guided by incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook and that avoided any appearance of following a preset course. Most participants viewed a proposed quarter-point policy easing at this meeting as part of a recalibration of the stance of policy, or mid-cycle adjustment, in response to the evolution of the economic outlook over recent months. A number of participants suggested that the nature of many of the risks they judged to be weighing on the economy, and the absence of clarity regarding when those risks might be resolved, highlighted the need for policymakers to remain flexible and focused on the implications of incoming data for the outlook.

Committee Policy Action
In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members noted that while there had been some improvement in economic conditions over the intermeeting period and the overall outlook remained favorable, significant risks and uncertainties attending the outlook remained. In particular, sluggish U.S. business fixed investment spending and manufacturing output had lingered, suggesting that risks and uncertainties associated with weak global economic growth and in international trade were weighing on the domestic economy. Strong labor markets and rising incomes continued to support the outlook for consumer spending, but modest growth in prices and wages suggested that inflation pressures remained muted. Inflation had continued to run below the Committee's 2 percent symmetric objective. Market-based measures of inflation compensation moved up modestly from the low levels recorded in June, but a portion of this change likely reflected the expectation by market participants of additional near-term monetary accommodation. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed. On this basis, all but two members agreed to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 2 to 2-1/4 percent at this meeting.

With this adjustment to policy, those members who voted for the policy action sought to better position the overall stance of policy to help counter the effects on the outlook of weak global growth and trade policy uncertainty, insure against any further downside risks from those sources, and promote a faster return of inflation to the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective than would otherwise be the case. Those members noted that the action taken at this meeting should be viewed as part of an ongoing reassessment of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate that began in late 2018. Two members preferred to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate. In explaining their policy views, those members noted that economic data collected over the intermeeting period had been largely positive and that they anticipated continued strong labor markets and solid growth in activity, with inflation gradually moving up to the Committee's 2 percent target. One member also noted that a further easing in policy at a time when the economy is very strong and asset prices are elevated could have adverse implications for financial stability.

Members agreed that in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the Committee's maximum-employment and symmetric 2 percent inflation objectives. They reiterated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Members generally agreed that it was important to maintain optionality in setting the future target range for the federal funds rate and, more generally, that near-term adjustments of the stance of monetary policy would appropriately remain dependent on the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook.

With regard to the postmeeting statement, the Committee implemented several adjustments in the description of the economic situation, including a revision to recognize that market-based measures of inflation compensation "remain low." The Committee stated that the reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate supported its view that "sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective" remained the most likely outcomes, but "uncertainties about this outlook remain." The phrase "as the Committee contemplates the future path" of the target range for the federal funds rate was added to underscore the Committee's intention to carefully assess incoming information before deciding on future policy adjustments. The statement noted that the Committee would "continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook" and would "act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective." Finally, the Committee announced the conclusion of the reduction of securities holdings in the SOMA. Ending the runoff of securities holdings two months earlier than initially planned was seen as having only very small effects on the balance sheet, with negligible implications for the economic outlook, and was helpful in simplifying communications regarding the usage of the Committee's policy tools.

